I'm a sort of materialist so I like to
think of of Consciousness as a
biological property that arose in
evolution and so we have to ask well
what does Consciousness do for us and
where might it be in the rest of biology
then I can't tell you how much time I've
spent contemplating the fact that every
morning I wake up as me there's 8
billion people in the world why am I
persistently me the other possibility is
in fact you're you're overestimating the
extent to which you remain you from day
to day oh you're not you Neil you're not
you man I need further explanation on
that
[Music]
sentence this is Star Talk special
edition and when you hear that you know
my two co-hosts are Gary O'Reilly Gary
nice Neil good to be back former Soccer
Pro Sports commentator sporting a new
part in his
head alerted yeah like a neural chip
yeah that's a surgical scar for what
they installed in your brain yeah they
were looking for something and it was a
complete waste of time I gota and of
course got Chuck Nice comedian actor
long time Star Talk co-host absolutely
always good to have you and Gary you you
cook up these topics well we we we have
a little group think between the
producers and the production team and we
land on a whole load of different
varieties but this is this is an ongoing
thought process uh on Consciousness and
we spoke with David Chas and we're now
going to get into another thought
process on Consciousness because it's
the hard problem of Consciousness and
but is it like a three-body problem and
unsolvable does it even exist is being
transhuman our future so you're thinking
about the future of our mind totally and
if so will we be able to upload our
Consciousness and exist forever and how
will that feel or not when we eventually
travel into deep space are we going to
come across alien life forms that are
super intelligent artificial
intelligence or we're going to find a
biological life form um there's a lot of
people think that our future will be Ai
and will exist as AI but that's a
discussion that we're going to get into
with our guest today Our Guest is alel
Seth a professor of cognitive and
computational Neuroscience at the
University of Sussex in England a place
I know reasonably well so he speaks your
language then yes he does so you have to
pay attention um so PhD in computer
science and artificial intelligence a
writer and author whose most recent book
being you was published in 2021 so Neil
please a delight to have you here Anil
Anil Anil I say that right that's
exactly right thank you very much for
having me it's a pleasure to be on the
show excellent excellent so all these
topics you know everyone you can't shake
a stick without having it land somewhere
where somebody is deeply thinking about
Consciousness and everybody thinks
they've got the answer so it it leaves
me to ask a pretty basic question here
what is it we're using to prove to
ourselves that Consciousness even exists
as a thing that could even possibly be
uploaded to a computer one day oh well
there's a lot of questions within that
question but I mean people don't even
agree on that I mean there's there are
some philosophers who might call
themselves illusionists who think that
Consciousness doesn't really exist in
the sense that you and I or if you ask
anyone on the street might might assume
that it does that we're just mistaken
that there's anything special about this
thing that we Call Conscious experience
now I think I think they're just wrong
frankly I mean there are many things in
consciousness we can't be sure whether
we're right or wrong but if you think
about it the only thing we can be really
sure of is our conscious experience
everything else is kind of inferred
through it whether it's the world around
us the self or everything else we know
in science it's sort of we we know it
because at some point we experience
something uh and so there is a there
there to explain Consciousness I think
is real there's a difference between
being awake and aware and being
completely out under general anesthesia
I think most of us would agree that some
things in the world are conscious at
least some of the time other other
people some other animals and some
things are not like tables and chairs
and and objects and there are other
things where there's a great deal of
uncertainty like um some other animals
insects people have to brain damage and
of course you know Hot Topic today
artificial intelligence the extent to
which you define consciousness in the
way you just did if AI then exhibits all
those properties you would have to then
concede that AI is conscious and what I
have been finding is every time AI hits
another threshold another goalpost
people move the goalposts again and that
makes
sense that that that that doesn't make
sense I was going to say it it makes
sense if you the the closer AI gets to
being truly conscious and sentient the
more we become less special as Who We
Are so we got to keep moving the post
right so you have to raise the bar so
that we can maintain our supposed
preeminence so anal how much of our
definition of Consciousness is just to
so that we feel
special well I think qu that that's a
profound point and it's it's driven a
lot of confusion about our relationship
I mean you'll notice Neil as an
astrophysicist right I mean the the
thought that we are special was what led
people for the longest time to think
that we're at the center of the universe
so plus it kind of looked that
way in all fairness standing on Earth
the whole universe revolved around us so
it wasn't completely in conflict with
evidence until it was that's all that is
that is true and then of course Darwin
did something similar with our nature as
creatures pointing out that we're also
not special in the sense of being
created by God in a different way from
all other all we're related to all other
animals and so yeah in that sense
Consciousness is the last Refuge of
human
exceptionalism beautiful
sentence that you we feel that human
consciousness is somehow really special
and it sets us apart uh you know dayart
made this very explicit he called
non-human animals uh Beast Machines or
bit machine in the French um and trying
to make the point there that non-human
animals were just Flesh and Blood
mechanisms robots made out of living
material that didn't have the kind at
least didn't have the kind of
Consciousness that mattered for for
moral consideration so we do have this
trat record and we've kind of got around
it in in most ways now we no longer
think we're at the center of the
universe we no longer think that we're
unrelated to all other creatures and we
most of us I think there's a wide
consensus that we're not the only
conscious creatures out there just ask
your cat ask your cat yeah if you could
ask a cat you can ask a cat they just
won't answer until you've left the
room so are there theories of
Consciousness and I you know I've seen a
lot of isms out there right dualism
monism materialism are these all ways to
try to get into this mysterious place
that is our mind they're all ways of
thinking about the problem or they sort
of things that come before the theories
they're philosophical theories so
Consciousness seems to be this
incredibly mysterious thing because on
the one hand we are physical creatures
we're made of stuff and complicated
stuff but it's stuff or it seems to be
stuff anyway and on the other hand there
are conscious experiences so intuitively
in my seem that the physical world is
very different from the world of
conscious experience and that no
explanation in terms of physics and
chemistry will tell you how or why
anything or anyone is conscious this is
what David Charmers called A Hard
problem Consciousness I know he's been
on on your show um before and and the
idea that they're totally unrelatable is
is dualism they operate in separate
Realms and you've got a whole bunch of
other isms but they're not really
theories they're the sort of perspective
that you might take from which you might
then build a theory let me interject
there when someone comes up to me and
says uh Dr Tyson I have a theory and I
say no Einstein had a the you have a
hypothesis just to be clear because
physical science a theory is a fully
tested explanation of phenomena that
make successful predictions I don't know
if that's getting semantic about the
word theory but many people say oh it's
just a theory without recognizing that
at least in the physical sciences a
theory is the highest form of
understanding we have no I think that's
right I think a theory is the goal isn't
it or a well tested and empirically well
established an explanatorily powerful
theory that that's the goal and I would
say in Consciousness we have
Proto theories there are the beginnings
of theories some are more ambitious than
others but none of them have reached the
level of maturity that we've seen in
physics with relativity quantum
mechanics all of all of these things I
mean they they are still theories so
they make predictions and they explain
observations about you know what happens
in the because one of the amazing things
about Consciousness philosophically it
seems incredibly mysterious but it has
this amazing advantage that brains are
relatively numerous relatively
accessible you know compared to the the
big bang or the the very small world of
quantum mechanics we can we can look
inside a living human brain as people
gain Consciousness lose Consciousness
change their Consciousness so we can
study it in in a sense much more easily
than some of the other frontiers of
mystery and that's great because then we
can begin to use this evidence to
constrain and and improve the theories
that we have you talk about it as a
mystery um is consciousness broken down
into different kind of types segments or
is it just one big thing I I prefer that
kind of divide and conquer approach
actually uh because if you treat it as
one big scary mystery in need of one
massive Eureka solution it it it can be
very resistant it can be resistant in
even in the sense of what would a
satisfying answer look like you know
what what would we be content with in
terms of an explanation and in other
areas of science this kind of divide and
conquer approach has has paid dividends
has a good parallel I think with with
the history of life it's
reductionism yeah let me add something
here The in in early days of physics and
all the branches of physics philosophers
played very important roles to help
shape questions and help the direction
of things but that was evidence that the
field was still in its infancy when you
had philosophers sort of running a among
you and looks like you have philosophers
at every turn when you're trying to
arrive at some conclusions here and at
what point will you be
evidence-based and no longer will the
philosopher in the armchair be useful to
you because all of your answers are
coming from the lab and not from their
brains I think philosophers are in it
for the long game with Consciousness and
one of the things I've seen over the
last 30 years that I've been doing this
stuff is is the dialogue between
philosophy and and science has become
richer certain things that may have
started purely philosophical have now
become you know the realm of the lab and
and that's great that's how most things
would be but once it's in the lab the
philosopher is a little less useful
that's all I'm saying because your
answers are coming from the lab I think
the point right what certainly the point
we're at right now is that philosophy is
still extremely useful because we're
still a bit confused about what the
questions we should ask our and how to
interpret the answers and the theories
that are coming up still have quite a
philosophical flavor and also the the
implications are hugely important and
they will remain philosophical like yes
we can have an understanding of what
happens in the brain when someone loses
Consciousness or so on but what do we do
with that understanding what do we do
with our understanding of Consciousness
in terms of how we treat other animals
how we treat um brain injured humans and
indeed what we do with AI there always
going to be all right so from that last
bit that you just said what is the
difference between the function of or or
something that functions like
Consciousness and what we feel cuz let's
be honest it's the true knowing that we
have yeah you know Consciousness for
individuals is this like very visceral
and intense knowing and we if we cannot
ascribe that to something else then we
say it's not conscious but yet there are
things that function as Consciousness
like tree root Networks it allows the
trees to literally talk to one another
and I need more water and that tree gets
more water or you know uh I need to
fight off this particular fungi like and
that is a kind of knowing but we won't
say they're conscious we'll just say
that's a function so where do you find
the balance and difference to make that
differentiation yeah it's it's a really
tricky um tight rope to walk because you
know on the one hand we have to use
human way of being as a kind of
Benchmark because we know that we are
conscious and that's that's a starting
point if you like but we don't want to
be too again
anthropocentric and and see everything
through this through this human lens and
not every function is going to need
Consciousness I'm a sort of materialist
so I like to think of of Consciousness
as a biological property that that arose
in evolution gradually um but to perform
certain functions to enable certain
functions in creatures
where it was useful and so we have to
ask well what does Consciousness do for
us and where might it be in the rest of
of biology then and again there's lots
of different answers to this but
Consciousness for us seems to bring a
ton of information together in this kind
of unified way so you said you know we
know we have this sense of knowing and
that seems to be this kind of thing you
open your eyes in the morning and
there's a whole unified world out there
you can just experience everything going
on around you your alarm clock smell of
coffee whatever it is you experience
your body and you experience you know
what you might do next I can't tell you
how much time I've spent contemplating
the fact that every morning I wake up as
me and not as someone else that's
because you're not in the Quantum
Leap okay all right I'm in the wrong
show you're in the wrong show buddy yeah
get out of here well why why would you
why would you expect to be someone else
when you woke up it's not that I expect
to be I just wonder why I'm not it's not
a matter of expectations it's there's 8
billion people in the world why am I
persistently me what is it about me that
makes me me every day I wake up but the
other the other possibility is in fact
you're you're overestimating the extent
to which you remain you from day to day
you know it's it's like you think about
you're not you but you're not you Neil
you're not you man I I need further
explanation on that sentence but just
think about Neil de eison at the age of
10 something you know is is that really
the same person well I have memories
from that from that age I have memories
but our experiences will alter us if you
like microscopically to the point where
a decade later we aren't quite that same
person no no I I get that but I have the
same memories of events that occurred
well you think you do but actually the
more often you you recall something the
less accurate that memory is that's what
they say but I work hard to avoid that
so we can wear a memory out is that what
you're saying you experience it
differently when you remember it and
then you remember it again and you
experience it differently when you
remember it and so every time a cell
makes a copy of itself it's you know not
the best
cell it might be slightly different it
might be slightly better it could be a
better cell it could some some slightly
worse as they say there two primary
failures of memory one of them is you
remember things that never happened and
the other one is you don't remember
things that did and I don't claim to
remember everything in my life but what
I do remember I remember with pretty
high precision and you forgot the third
which is you remember that a black man
did
it
what in the police lineup
yeah but I just want to to what Gary
said because he's absolutely right that
the thing is if there's a there's a
phenomenon in perception called change
blindness One Way change blindness can
happen is that if something changes very
slowly then we don't perceive the change
our perception can change but we don't
experience the change of perception
something like that might well be
happening with the self so us our
experience of self is changing just a
little bit day by day but because it
changes so slowly we never experience
ourselves as changing or or or we do so
only when we compare it like oh what was
I like 10 years ago 20 years again I'm
actually may be quite different okay so
therapists have paid a lot of money to
speed up that
process well I think they can I mean
they can certainly that's one way of
think about they can certainly bring out
aspects that we have forgotten to point
out how different we are how different
we can be as well why else go to a
therapist unless there's something you
want to change that's right there a
potential for change I think speed up
may be not the best term because you
know they certainly want you to reveal
things about yourself to yourself but
you know the longer it
takes the better it
is more billing Cycles that's all I'm
saying that yeah so Anil what Chuck was
saying about the tree if we kind of roll
that out you referring to the the melium
the network the fungal Network yeah but
just taking the fact that we roll that
out from to table and we say is it
psychism that's basically and I'll I'll
be very basic with this because that's
all I can be that there's a
Consciousness inferred to everything can
you uh for for my sake please because
I've heard the term
psychism and I've even looked it up and
I I still don't get the whole concept is
it that Consciousness is derived from
everything Consciousness is inferred
upon everything
or something in between I'm I to have
heard the word but I've never looked it
up it just sounds kind of new Agy to me
that's all but I want get to get
official yeah where does an stand on
this what what is it well I I I'm not a
fan of it but it is a wellestablished
philosophical position and it is that
Consciousness it's not just inferred
everywhere it is fundamental it's
something of equivalent status to mass
energy or electrical charge it is a
fundamental aspect of the universe in
which we live so it's not saying that a
table is conscious or a tree is
conscious it's just Consciousness exists
at the most fundamental level of things
and then certain things like human
beings exhibit Consciousness at this
other level too of a whole organism but
a table wouldn't a table is made of
things that are individually a little
bit conscious but there's no
consciousness that inheres to the table
itself now I think I I mean that's what
it is for me it doesn't really help okay
what you just said is why chuck could
read the explanation and still not know
what the hell it is
because I mean if that's your best
explanation for that word we need some
work on that well anel said he wasn't a
big fan anyway so he's probably going to
want to throw it under the bus what's
but what's wrong with it I mean
Consciousness is fundamental and
everywhere that's reasonable isn't it
yeah as long as I'm conscious it's
reasonable I don't know what everywhere
means I guess that's my my big question
you know in the same way that that mass
is basically pretty much everywhere
electrical charges pretty much
everywhere the these are things that are
that they don't have lower lower levels
wa so so Consciousness is on the Moon I
mean I'm trying to understand the
universe is large and life is only on
Earth and pan psychism is trying to
declare that Consciousness permeates the
universe basically
yes yeah I mean that's the only way you
could look at it from what you just said
Anil is that that it's a kind of um
connective pressure that is a force
acting upon us all whether or not you're
aware of it or not so a table is not
aware of that Force but it's a part of
that force and maybe it's that that
allows us to interact with the table
through our consciousness readings
Rupert sheldrake is a fan of this if
memory serves is that correct you know
I'm not entirely sure I had a had a long
had about an 8 Hour train journey with
ruper sheld last year so this this
should be clear to me but he's certainly
of the
view that's the British train system for
you this was in Norway
um in Britain would have been 24 hours
um in yeah you go so certainly he's of
the view that everything that
Consciousness is everywhere that life is
life and Consciousness are very closely
tight in that I kind of agree with him
there's an intimate connection between
life and Consciousness I probably would
put it in a in a slightly different way
that for me not everything that is alive
is consciousness but I certainly think
that being alive is critical to being
conscious Neil I've read that some
people want to think of Consciousness as
extending Beyond self as a shared sort
of Consciousness field out there now I'm
I'm always one for a fun idea a fun New
IDE a about how the universe works but
in the physical sciences we put very
high currency on testability of an idea
not just whether it sounds good to an
audience and so are there people testing
pan psychism in a way that would give it
some teeth here because you in your role
are skeptical of it yeah well pan
psychism itself can't be tested that's
one one problem with it but it's a
problem with all philosophical positions
it's just a way of thinking about what
Consciousness how it fits into the
universe so that but the idea that you
had about does Consciousness sort of
extend beyond the body can it be
something that interacts with with other
things you know in in some kind of field
that goes out beyond the brain that can
be tested I mean people have tried to
test these sorts of things all the time
extra sensory perception telepathy all
of these sorts of things and none of
them have stood up when they've been
tested rigorously in the face of of Hard
Evidence so Anil uh my
my
casual reviews of literature tell me
that over the decades every animal that
we used to think was not thinking about
anything has demonstrated some level of
intelligence or competence that was
beyond what was originally ascribed to
them and no longer can you really call
someone a bird brain when you see some
of the great feats of thought and
problem solving that birds have uh
performed so
today is there a list that people keep
of animals that yeah they're conscious
and then you cross over and they say
they're not conscious or is that just a
fuzzy boundary and it's going to one day
move entirely into the full animal
kingdom I think I think it's a fuzzy
boundary it's certainly a fuzzy boundary
in terms of what people think uh but it
may also be a fuzzy boundary in reality
you know there may be some creatures for
which it's really just unclear whether
they're conscious or not might be this
gradual thing that fades in and Fades
out these days I think there is
consensus that it's not just humans it's
other primates it's it's all other
mammals I think certainly I think and
most other neuroscientists I think would
agree that except the delicious ones the
the delicious ones are not conscious
people you have nothing to fear the
delicious animals are not conscious at
all thank you Chuck for
world according to CH yeah but then
beyond beyond the mammals if you look
most mammals we all have the same kind
of basic brain structures and processes
that turn out to be important in humans
for Consciousness according to most the
most of the theories that we have but
then when you go beyond mammals things
get tricky things really do get tricky
because we don't want to assume that the
kind of Consciousness present let's say
in a bumblebee needs to be humanlike in
order to be to be valid or even mamalian
like right we we can't look we wouldn't
say language is a useful Criterion the
fact that a bumblebee can't speak to us
there's no reason to think that it's not
conscious um so what do we say that it's
not speaking to other bees well bees do
speak to other bees very very well but
speak to other Tre things speaking to
other things or communicating in some
way is that's that's very widespread so
I would say like right now where people
are most uncertain including myself is
at this kind of level so insects
including bees fish what about many
different kinds of fish but are fish
conscious or not again they seem very
different but when you look at for
instance whether fish will seek out
anesthetic in a proactive way if if
they've got you know a little little
injury now they do things that are very
suggestive that they experience pain now
we can't know for sure we can only make
a best guess and that best guess is
always going to shift and we're always
going to have to walk this line by
between using humans as a benchmark but
not sort of assuming that everything is
conscious just because it you know it
responds to its environment or it grows
or or it does something else that could
be done in a way that doesn't require
Consciousness or that there's a
different category of conscious that
like you said maybe they just
experienced their own category category
yeah and
Consciousness you know I mean I remember
growing up we were told that humans had
the biggest brains but then we realized
no we don't have the biggest brains so
they had to take the ratio of the mass
of a human to the mass of your brain and
then we were at the top of that list
okay but then what they didn't tell us
was that
mice and some dogs come very close to us
at that ratio they didn't really say
that and then what they also didn't say
was we're at the top of that list only
barely only mammals if you bring in
other animals there are other animals
that have a higher brain to body weight
ratio like midsized birds like crows
this sort of thing um they have a higher
brain to body weight ratio and the
highest brain to body weight ratio are
certain species of ants we've all seen
how giant an heads can be relative to
their body so this how much brain is in
your organism calculus is still doesn't
leave us at the top and if brain is what
gives us Consciousness I'm perfectly
happy to say ants are conscious yes but
not smart because they keep trying to
move that rubber tree and let's be
honest I mean people do keep trying to
find ways in which we can still put
humans at the top of every pile of every
list we make so it might not be brain to
body ratio anymore now it'll be
something to do with the complexity of
the connectivity in the brain and if you
look at that oh maybe that puts us back
at the top or it's see it's the degree
to which we have know brain in the front
of our brain a frontal matter or
something like that there'll always be a
way and it's not I'm not saying that
there's nothing special or distinctive
about human brains human intelligence
and human consciousness I think I think
there clearly is I mean the kind of
language that we have is something that
you don't see in other other species but
isn't isn't that the one thing that we
always are going to fall back on is
language that no animal community
communicates in the various ways that we
do if you take our speech if you take
our hearing if you take our sight we
will still find a way to communicate
with one another which no other animal
does that I think there's something
right about that I think language it's
present in other species and it can be
the more you look the more you find
right if you look harder you find you
find more by the way the whales wonder
whether just because we face each other
and make sounds they wonder if we're
actually
communicating the will say that to each
other so Anil are we to the point now
where we've blurred the lines between
intelligence and Consciousness I'm glad
you mentioned that this has been in the
background so far and I think it the
confusion the conflation of these two
concepts can lead us astray intelligence
is something again that we think of as
distinctively human or or certainly we
see we like to put ourselves at the top
of the intelligence tree and we take
intelligence as a proxy for
Consciousness if we look at non-human
animals we tend to think well if they're
smart then they're more likely to be
conscious but actually they're very
different concepts so you can imagine an
organism an animal being conscious
without being particularly smart because
the most basic widespread conscious
States might be things like feelings of
suffering or pain or or PL
and you don't have to be highly
intelligent as a species for those kinds
of experiences to be useful and then on
the other hand and this is where we come
back to the AI situation there may be
ways of being intelligent which just
don't involve or require Consciousness
at all no one has ever asked whether AI
feels pain yes they have I have many
people have you've asked chat GPT all of
these kinds of questions and of course
chat GPT will say what did it and what
did it tell you it well it depends how
you prompt it but this is is one of the
you know a couple of years ago there was
this engineer for Google guy called
Blake Le Moy I think and this was a
chatbot called Lambda wasn't nearly as
good as the chat language models we have
now and he had a dialogue with it about
whether it was conscious and was
persuaded that it was these days if you
have a similar dialogue with one of the
he's the guy that got fired he's the guy
that got guy got fired for saying that
he got fired for saying doesn't mean he
was wrong I think he was wrong but you
know he he got fired for breaching
confidential ity but it causes big fuori
right you know what if language models
actually are conscious and because if
you ask them they will appear to think
very deeply about these questions and
come up with plausible answers and
especially if you ask them to talk about
Consciousness as if no one's listening
you know what they really think and do
they really have an inner life they'll
say yes but of course that is exactly
what language models are supposed to do
you know they're trained on an enormous
amount of texts which will give them you
the statistical associations to generate
plausible answers like that I think the
our tendency to think that a language
model is conscious is more a reflection
of our human biases that we can't
imagine a system speaking to us unless
it's conscious rather than a an insight
into whether the system itself actually
is conscious because we can explain how
it works so Neil and Neil as well as
Neil sorry of Neils chat
gp4 p the touring test but that's
exactly point that simply equal
Consciousness no but that's exactly the
point wait wait I'd like to think
they've all passed the touring test ever
since Eliza back in 1960s okay whatever
anyone defined as the touring test at
the time it passes it and they say oh
well maybe we has to move we have to
move the goal post to more so I I if you
brought any of these large language
models back in time even the most
primitive of them back in time they all
would have said it pass the touring test
do we need more goalposts not just move
them do we need more goalposts in the
sense of we need a multitude of tests
that we then cross reference against
each other to say that then shows me
that it has or it hasn't that's exactly
right so the touring test by the way I
like to think of it more of a test of
human gullibility rather than of machine
intelligence and but either it was still
a touring test right think of it
whatever you would yeah what Alan Turing
had in mind that was handily Satisfied
by people before anyone had any idea
what computers could be they say yep I'm
talking there's a human being on the
other side of this machine Alan touring
was easily
catfished but it was explicitly a test
of whether machines can think it was a
test of machine intelligence it was not
stated as a test of machine
Consciousness and there's a a beautiful
Di
you the film you've seen the film X
mackina Alex gallen's film um wonderful
and there's a scene in that where where
I think the invent is called Nathan and
and the program is called Caleb and and
they're speaking and that Nathan asked
Caleb to say what the touring test is he
say test of machine intelligence and
then the dialogue goes well if you've
created machine Consciousness that's an
act of God something like that and he's
slipped between intelligence and
consciousness so what we need is a kind
of touring test for Consciousness not a
touring test for intelligence so I think
I think you're right we need we need a a
multitude of tests and that's the
blurring of the line again between
intelligence and Consciousness yeah I
mean there in some sense they're related
right being intelligent allows us to
have different kinds of conscious
experiences like the ability to feel
regret rather than just sadness relies
on enough intelligence to imagine
alternative action and alternative
outcomes so all things being equal they
might be related but they are different
things so if the if GPT whatever really
convinces us that it is intelligent that
is still not sufficient evidence that it
is conscious and Neil when I communicate
with you am I executing a large language
model in my own head I'm not using a
lookup table yeah right I'm not there's
there's words in my head that I've used
before I'm more likely to compose one
sentence of a certain variety versus
another so the the
probability of words that follow other
words when I speak maybe I'm just AI
maybe I'm just chat
gp5 I think you're much more than that
much more interesting and Rich than gpc5
and I I know you very well but think
about it there's many many differences I
mean there's a few similarities right to
some extent this is what you a lot of
things in AI based on neural networks
and it was you it was wonderful to see
um Jeff Hinton and John hopfield win the
Nobel Prize in physics for their work in
machine learning and of course a lot of
that is based on neural networks and
neural networks are inspired at some
level by what's happening inside
biological brains like but there's tons
of differences language models that we
have around us now are trained on
basically the entire Corpus of
everything that's ever been written I
mean they're trained on the whole and
available and searcha postable posted
but they're trained on a ton of data
right we don't need that we learn to
speak on much less data we can we can do
things that that language models cannot
do what whatever we're doing it's not
it's not the same thing even though
there might be
similarities very good point what does
the future have in store for this us
here where are we going what's next can
can we upload our Consciousness into a
jar can we live forever is don't open
that jar
it's your great great grandfather you
kill
[Laughter]
him meanwhile I don't think we can
upload ourselves into the cloud I I I
worry about that whole way of thinking I
think it's this it's just the latest
manifestation of kind of tech bro
hubristic Singularity nonsense that that
we don't really need so if we s
somewhere on the line Anil artificial
intelligence
will have consciousness
David Charmers seems to think that that
will be coming in a few years time we've
got the Silicon intelligence that we're
we're very familiar with but there is a
synthetic biological intelligence is the
biological
intelligence more disposed to sort of
following the human thing of
Consciousness I don't think personally
and I am a bit to David Chas and I have
had conversations about this and I think
we disagree a bit about it so I
personally don't think that
AI made out of silicon is likely to be
conscious I think it might be very
persuasive to us that it is but I think
there's some good reason to think that
it that it won't be this doesn't mean
that it's impossible to build synthetic
Consciousness the question is just how
similar does it have to be to biological
Consciousness does it have to be made
out of the same stuff does it have to be
made out of neurons or carbon or could
you do it in another material I think
it's an open question I think artificial
Consciousness for me is much more likely
to arise not in the circuits of some
future language model but in
Laboratories that are building things
like organoids brain organoids which are
made out of the same stuff so you these
brain organoids they're made out of
actual neurons human neurons in many
cases derived from from stem cells so
here like a whole level of uncertainty
goes out the window it's made out of the
same stuff so we don't have to worry
about whether the stuff matters or
whether Consciousness is something that
a computer could have but the reason we
get less worked up about it is because
you know at least to so far these
organoids they don't really do anything
very interesting they just sit there in
a dish and so we don't we don't think
they're conscious you know our
psychological biases are not not
exercise in the same way but as they get
more complicated as they start doing
stuff I think there that's where we have
the real ethical worries I if I come to
this as a physicist I will not
ultimately distinguish between a neuron
firing
electrochemically and silicon firing
Electro who cares who cares what it's
made of if all that matters is the
electrochemical signal so this this
distinction that people are making feels
very needlessly artificial to me I mean
you know as a physicist there's a big
difference between what's happening in a
silicon chip and what's happening in a
brain it's not I I agree but there
wouldn't have to be in principle is all
I'm saying once if I get the full
electrochemical mapping of your brain
and then created in Silicon I've just
duplicated your brain and and I'm doing
it without carbon I'm using who cares I
care okay but there's a there's a reason
I care there's a reason I care and it's
because you you've helped yourself to
this kind of thought experiment that
that that you've just said well in
principle it could be done like you
could just duplicate everything that's
going on in your brain in Silicon but
actually you know it may not be possible
to do that for instance take the Golden
Gate Bridge you if you try to make that
out of cheese you're not going to be
able to do it know the bridge has to be
made out of a certain material that has
certain physical properties and the
stuff inside our brains have certain
physical properties that silicon doesn't
um if you think all that matters are
neurons that
exchange spikes action potential you
know in a digital way then you might
think well okay we've abstracted away
from the messy fine details of biology
so then silicon should be fine but
there's actually much more going on in
the brain than just this digital
exchange of spikes and if that stuff
matters like things like electrical
Fields neurotransmitters all of this
stuff chemicals washing around then
there are things that you know you just
can't even in principle replicate in
Silicon well I would just say we're not
there yet but I wouldn't preclude it
that's all because you know it's like
you look at look at things mechanically
brain just happens to be a more complex
example of other things there are organs
we have or joints we can replace your
knees your hips you know we can replace
things that were functioning in your
body and in another era we would have
said oh the human body is unreplaceable
it's got you know millions of years of
evolution and it is perfect for what no
get rid of it you've got cartilage
missing right so I I I have more
confidence in the power of physics in
this equation than and it could just be
a matter of how big are your tools to
move around molecules to configurations
that you might need or want if you if
you allow engineering at that level well
then of course you can you can duplicate
the brain but you might still not be
able to make it yeah as a silicon chip
it it might have to be made out of the
same kinds of building blocks in order
to have the same kind of functional
properties like and at that level it's
biological right it's biological because
there's another way to put it which is I
think perhaps more intuitive like
computers that the power of computers is
their designed to be the kinds of things
for which you can completely and easily
separate what they do from what they are
made of what they do and what they are
is different that's why you know
software that runs on my computer will
run on somebody else's that's actually a
very very special and rare property that
you don't find in nature General and
brains are not the kind of thing for
which you can separate what they do from
what they are so just to just to wind
this up a bit I as you as you surely
know Ray Kur had an updated version of
his book The Singularity is near and
guess what the new title is called well
it's nerra it's n the Golden Gate Bridge
made out of cheese
Theo GD uh it's called The Singularity
is nearer oh wow how many focus groups
did he go through for that so so Anil
can you take us out with where are you
on this notion that the brain machine
interface will reach a singularity point
and all of the future history of
civilization will be different because
we're a competitive species we have to
be at the top of every table so we're
going to make a shortcut and put
something in our own heads so as we can
keep our Consciousness and be super
intelligent or am I just barking up the
wrong tree again I mean this this this
whole idea of the singularity I find
very very suspicious right I just that
it's it's based on these ideas of things
getting exponentially better faster
bigger and the one thing we know about
human psychology is that we are
absolutely terrible uh about
understanding um the nature of
exponential change we were terrible
about this during the pandemic
we are linear
people so so if if you stand on an
exponential everything behind you looks
completely flat and everything in front
of you looks incredibly Steep and it's
the same wherever you are on that curve
and so it's very hard to judge what
what's happening so I I find our
intuitions get get really unreliable
when we start thinking about these kinds
of things so there may be some sort of
escape velocity where where we reach a
threshold and Things become very
different for me this is most likely to
happen not necessarily with AI but with
longevity research you know there might
come a time where people know enough
that for each passing year they're able
to extend their lifespan by more than a
year so effectively you you never die so
there people talk about that I find
that's also pretty dystopian frankly but
there might be another threshold indeed
it's possible where you artificial
intelligence becomes smarter than us in
some ways it's already smarter than us
in some ways
but I think we we again see it the wrong
way if we think of it in those terms as
a sort of race between us and the
Machine one of my mentors the
philosopher Daniel Dennett I think he
put it best um he sadly died earlier
this year one of the things he said I
will always remember was that when it
comes to AI we should always remember
that we're creating tools and not
colleagues and be very mindful of the
difference so that the technologies that
we create compliment are particular
human intelligence and we should be less
preoccupied with trying to replace it or
upload ourselves to it or any of these
things that actually when you dig into
them have for me slightly unsavory
motivations about you know living
forever bootstrapping oneself to the top
of the societal pyramids and all of the
all of these kinds of things I think
it's an old story we've seen many times
of course Daniel D was first out of the
box to declare with his one of his early
books called conscious
explained that was the title of one of
his books he felt we were like already
there here's the book no more books need
to be published on this subject and that
was in
1991 that was like more than 30 years
ago yeah I remember reading that my
first year of undergraduate actually it
was I think even earlier than that I
read it in 1991 Anil are we likely to
enter a post-biological
age and come out of you know just no I
mean total our total exist
our species will go to we got to end on
that answer so make it make it a good
answer because that's going to be the
last thing people
pressure well the short answer is is no
I don't I don't think we are I think we
are likely always going to be
fundamentally biological though we will
become more cyborg you know we will and
we already are intertwined with
Technologies and these levels of
dependency will get deeper and deeper
brain machine interfaces are coming our
exploration is cyborgian we have a SUV
siiz Rover on Mars right now and it's
doing our bidding for uh the search and
Discovery and testing and and imagery so
because that the answer to that question
matters when we ask if we make alien
contact will it be with some biological
form or will it be with some machine
version of them either just as a robotic
Neary or as an
actual uh uploaded Consciousness so that
their physical form doesn't have to
survive the Hostile journey of space
travel our robot is meeting their
robot yeah that's Mo I thought the most
likely thing was it would just be some
sort of uninteresting goo that we're
likely to encounter if we encounter
alien
life but if we encounter intelligent
life then I agree I agree with Chuck I
think it's more likely to be a robot
Avatar rather than a biological creature
well a movie in 1958 called The Blob
which would classify as being a goo but
it it would come after you so you said
just a goo be careful how you think
about that concept not all Goos are
equal it's a good point thank
you I can't believe you came on this
show thinking that's a definite thing
I've got to say that is how we will
remember you on this show not all who
are created equal and an Neil as this
show went on you got darker and darker
and darker evidence that you're in a
different time zone than we are and
you're hailing from what what part of
England I'm in Brighton on on the south
coast where it's pretty dark Now
Brighton so the Sun is setting for you
up for us which dare I say is evidence
that we live in our round earth okay
Anil great to have you on the show maybe
we can come back to you when we have
further developments the future of mine
all right Chuck good to have you always
a pleasure all right Gary pleasure Neil
thank you you made all this happen Neil
degrass Tyson you're a personal
astrophysicist keep looking up
[Music]